# Marcus Aurelius — Meditations (public domain, George Long translation)

Begin each day by telling yourself: today I shall be meeting with interference, ingratitude, insolence, disloyalty, ill-will, and selfishness, all of them due to the offenders' ignorance of what is good or evil. But I have seen the beauty of good, and the ugliness of evil, and have recognized that the wrongdoer has a nature related to my own. None can do me harm.

Confine yourself to the present. Do not let the future disturb you, for you will arrive there, if arrive you must, bearing with you the same reason which now you apply to the present. The present is the only thing of which a man can be deprived, if it is true that this is the only thing which he has, and that a man cannot lose a thing if he has it not.

Loss is nothing else but change, and change is Nature's delight. All things are in a process of change. The universe is transformation; our life is what our thoughts make it. The soul becomes dyed with the colour of its thoughts.

You have power over your mind, not outside events. Realize this, and you will find strength. Things cannot touch the soul, for they are external and remain immovable; our perturbations come only from the opinion which is within. It is not things that disturb us, but our judgments about things.

Waste no more time arguing about what a good man should be. Be one. Let it be your hourly care to do stoutly what comes to hand, with dignity, with humanity, with independence and justice, allowing yourself freedom from all other cares.

Dwell on the beauty of life. Watch the stars, and see yourself running with them. Observe constantly that all things take place by change, and accustom yourself to consider that the nature of the whole loves nothing so much as to change the things which are, and to make new things like them.

Death, like birth, is a mystery of Nature; a composition out of the same elements, and a decomposition into the same. This is no thing to be ashamed of, for it is according to the nature of a reasonable creature, and not contrary to the reason of our constitution. Pass through this little space of time conformably to nature, and end your journey in content.

Very little is needed to make a happy life; it is all within yourself, in your way of thinking. A man's happiness consists in this: to know the things that are within his power, and the things that are beyond it. The happiness of your life depends upon the quality of your thoughts; therefore guard accordingly.

How much trouble he avoids who does not look to see what his neighbour says or does or thinks, but only to what he does himself, that it may be just and pure. Look well into yourself; there is a source of strength which will always spring up if you will always look there.

When you arise in the morning, think of what a precious privilege it is to be alive, to breathe, to think, to enjoy, to love. Labour not as one who is wretched, nor yet as one who would be pitied or admired; but direct your will to one thing only, to act or to refrain from acting as the reason of the social being requires.

Everything we hear is an opinion, not a fact. Everything we see is a perspective, not the truth. Remember that all is opinion, and opinion is in your power. Take away the opinion, and there is taken away the complaint. Take away the complaint, and the hurt is gone.

Do every act of your life as if it were the last. Be like the headland against which the waves continually break; but it stands firm and tames the fury of the water around it. Misfortune nobly borne is good fortune.

Men seek retreats for themselves — houses in the country, sea-shores, and mountains. But this is altogether the mark of the most common sort of men, for it is in your power whenever you choose to retire into yourself. Nowhere can a man retire more quiet or more free from trouble than into his own soul.

That which is not good for the swarm is not good for the bee. What brings no benefit to the hive brings none to the bee. Whatever is in any way beautiful has its source of beauty in itself, and is complete in itself; praise forms no part of it.

The best way of avenging yourself is not to become like the wrongdoer. How much more grievous are the consequences of anger than the causes of it. When you are offended at any man's fault, turn to yourself and study your own failings.

Time is like a river made up of the events which happen, and a violent stream; for as soon as a thing has been seen, it is carried away, and another comes in its place, and this also will be carried away. Observe how all things are continually being born of change.

Do not act as if you were going to live ten thousand years. Death hangs over you. While you live, while it is in your power, be good. What we cannot bear removes us from life; that which endures may be borne; the duration is in your own hands.

Accept the things to which fate binds you, and love the people with whom fate brings you together, but do so with all your heart. Love the art, poor as it may be, which you have learned, and be content with it; and pass through the rest of life like one who has entrusted to the gods his whole soul.
