# Friedrich Nietzsche — Thus Spake Zarathustra / Beyond Good and Evil / Twilight of the Idols / The Gay Science / Dawn (public domain: Common, Zimmern, Ludovici, Kennedy translations)

Man is a rope, fastened between the animal and the Superman — a rope over an abyss. A dangerous crossing, a dangerous wayfaring, a dangerous looking-back, a dangerous trembling and halting. What is great in man is that he is a bridge and not a goal: what can be loved in man is that he is a transition and a down-going.

I tell you: one must still have chaos in one, to give birth to a dancing star. I tell you: ye have still chaos in you. Alas! there cometh the time when man will no longer give birth to any star. The time of the most despicable man cometh, he that is no longer able to despise himself.

He who fighteth with monsters should be careful lest he thereby become a monster. And if thou gaze long into an abyss, the abyss will also gaze into thee. There is in such matters no measure: he who looketh too long into his own depths must beware lest the depths look back.

Out of life's school of war — what does not kill me makes me stronger. Examine the lives of the best and most fruitful men and peoples, and ask yourselves whether a tree that is to grow proudly skyward can dispense with bad weather and storms.

If a man has a why for his life, he can put up with almost any how. Man does not strive after happiness; only the Englishman does that. Man does not seek pleasure and avoid pain merely; he seeks, above all, to discharge his strength, to grow, to overcome.

Without music, life would be an error. The day on which I have not danced even once — let that day be counted lost to me. And let that wisdom be false to me which brought no laughter with it.

The snake which cannot cast its skin has to perish. So too the minds which are prevented from changing their opinions; they cease to be mind. Convictions are more dangerous enemies of truth than lies.

In every real man a child is hidden that wants to play. Up then, ye women, and discover the child in man! Maturity in a man means to have rediscovered the seriousness one had as a child, at play.

I want to learn more and more to see as beautiful what is necessary in things; then I shall be one of those who make things beautiful. Amor fati: let that be my love henceforth! I do not want to wage war against the ugly. I do not want to accuse, I do not want even to accuse the accusers. Some day I wish to be only a Yea-sayer.

Build your cities on the slopes of Vesuvius! Send your ships into uncharted seas! Live at war with your peers and yourselves! Believe me, the secret of reaping the greatest fruitfulness and the greatest enjoyment from existence is to live dangerously.

Become what thou art. Thou shalt become the person thou art. And what saith thy conscience? "Thou shalt become him whom thou now art." We, however, want to become those we are — the new, the unique, the incomparable, those who give themselves their own law, those who create themselves.

Thoughts are the shadows of our feelings — always darker, emptier, and simpler than these. Whatever is done from love always takes place beyond good and evil. And the great epochs of our life come when we gain the courage to rechristen our evil as what is best in us.

You must be ready to burn yourself in your own flame: how could you become new, if you had not first become ashes? Of all that is written, I love only what a person has written with his blood. Write with blood, and thou wilt experience that blood is spirit.

He who climbeth on the highest mountains laugheth at all tragic plays and tragic realities. Courageous, unconcerned, scornful, coercive — so doth wisdom wish us; she is a woman, and ever loveth only a warrior. Learn to laugh at yourselves as ye ought to laugh.

This is now my way: where is yours? Thus did I answer those who asked me "the way." For the way — it doth not exist! So spake Zarathustra. Be true to the earth, and believe not those who speak to you of superearthly hopes.
