# Seneca — Epistulae Morales / On the Shortness of Life / On Benefits (public domain, Gummere & Stewart translations)

Continue to act thus, my dear Lucilius: set yourself free for your own sake; gather and save your time, which till lately has been forced from you, or filched away, or has merely slipped from your hands. Make yourself believe the truth of my words, that certain moments are torn from us, that some are gently removed, and that others glide beyond our reach. The most disgraceful kind of loss, however, is that due to carelessness. Hold every hour in your grasp. Lay hold of today's task, and you will not need to depend so much upon tomorrow.

It is not that we have a short time to live, but that we waste a great deal of it. Life is long enough, and a sufficiently generous amount has been given to us for the highest achievements if it were all well invested. But when it is squandered in luxury and carelessness, when it is devoted to no good end, forced at last by the ultimate necessity we perceive that it has passed away before we were aware that it was passing.

Let us prepare our minds as if we had come to the very end of life. Let us postpone nothing. Let us balance life's account every day. The one who daily puts the finishing touches to his life is never in want of time. He who has learned to die has unlearned to be a slave.

Begin at once to live, and count each separate day as a separate life. Whoever has thus arranged his days has need of nothing further; he has reached safe harbour, while the rest are still tossed upon the open sea.

Ponder for a long time whether you shall admit a given person to your friendship; but when you have decided to admit him, welcome him with all your heart and soul. Speak as boldly with him as with yourself. Regard him as loyal, and you will make him loyal. When friendship is settled, you must trust; before friendship is formed you must pass judgment.

We should every night call ourselves to account: what infirmity have I mastered today? what passions opposed? what temptation resisted? what virtue acquired? Our vices will abate of themselves if they be brought every day to the reckoning.

Be careful lest this reading of many authors and books of every kind be a token of a wavering mind. You must linger among a limited number of master-thinkers, and digest their works, if you would derive ideas which shall win firm hold in your mind. To be everywhere is to be nowhere.

What good does it do you to go overseas, to move from city to city? If you would escape the troubles that beset you, what you need is not a different place but a different self. You must lay aside the burdens of the mind; until you do this, no place will satisfy you. They change their sky, not their soul, who rush across the sea.

Set aside now and then a number of days during which you shall be content with the scantiest and cheapest fare, and say to yourself: "Is this the condition that I feared?" It is precisely in times of security that the spirit should be preparing itself for the harder times; while Fortune is bestowing favours, then is the time to fortify yourself against her rebuffs.

You ask what is the proper limit to wealth? It is, first, to have what is necessary, and, second, to have what is enough. The wise man regards the reason for all his actions, but not the results. The beginning is in our own power; destiny decides the issue.

It is the part of a great mind to despise wrongs done to it; the most contemptuous form of revenge is not to deem your adversary worth taking vengeance upon. Anger, if not restrained, is frequently more hurtful to us than the injury that provokes it.

Associating with the crowd is harmful; there is no person who does not make some vice attractive to us, or stamp it upon us, or taint us unconsciously therewith. To consort with the crowd is harmful; the more people we mingle with, the greater the danger. Retire into yourself as much as you can.

No one is a slave by nature; the body may be assigned to a master, but the mind is its own. He who fears death will never do anything worthy of a living man. But he who knows that this was the condition under which he was born will live according to nature, and will see to it that none of the things which happen to him are unforeseen.

We are mistaken when we look forward to death; the major portion of death has already passed. Whatever years lie behind us are in death's hands. Therefore, hold every hour in your grasp, and depend less upon tomorrow, for while we are postponing, life speeds by.

Nowhere can a man find a quieter or more untroubled retreat than in his own soul. Cling, therefore, to this sound and wholesome rule of life: indulge the body only so far as is needful for good health. Treat it somewhat strictly, that it may not be disobedient to the mind.

A god dwells within us — not a god of gold or silver. A holy spirit indwells within us, one who marks our good and bad deeds, and is our guardian. As we treat this spirit, so are we treated by it. No one can be good without the help of god; and as we treat this guardian, so it treats us.

He who receives a benefit with gratitude repays the first instalment of it. A benefit consists not in what is done or given, but in the intention of the giver or doer. The hand that gives is blessed; let us give as we would wish to receive — gladly, quickly, and without hesitation.
